This code challenge is a follow up to the previous video.
You will reimplement the experiment we ran and also make it a little bit more flexible and a little
bit more sophisticated.
You will learn more about working with hook functions, and also how to measure both global and targeted
impacts of the manipulations.
Let's begin.
The main goal of exercise one is to write a hook function that calculates t tests, just like what you
saw in the previous video, except that the T tests here are going to be run inside the hook function.
So some details import the Bert large model.
The small model that we worked with in the previous video has 12 transformer blocks, and the large
version has 24 blocks.
The MLP expansion layer.
Where is that.
That is here that has a little over 4000 neurons, instead of a little over 3000.
For the smaller version.
So I recommend putting this model on the GPU.
Then you can copy the him.her dataset from the previous video, tokenize it, and then put the tokens
on the GPU as well.
One thing I would like you to do that's slightly different from how we normally work with this dataset,
is to pre-compute a vector of target indices that looks like this.
So this vector contains 108 integers, and each integer indicates the position of the target word in
each sentence.
So that means that in the first sentence, the word him appears at token index three, and also in the
second sentence, and so on.
So the main part of this exercise is to write a hook function that looks something like this.
So inside this hook function, grab all of the MLP activation values from the expansion layer but before
the non-linearity is applied.
So before the Jlu is applied then you want to calculate a t test on the him versus her activation values
only in the target words of course.
And for this exercise.
For this code challenge, you don't actually need to store the t values themselves.
You can just store a boolean vector that indicates whether each neuron is statistically significant
for him or significant for her.
That's what you would store down here.
So basically this would just be vectors of trues and falses.
They would have a value of true when the t test is significant and a value of false when the t test
is not significant.
So make sure that those results are stored in a dictionary so that you can access them later in the
code challenge.
Also, implant this hook into all of the layers in the model and not just one layer like what we did
in the previous video.
So that's for exercise one.
You don't need to run any data yet, you can just set everything up.
So now you should pause the video and work through the code.
And now I will switch to Python and discuss my solution.
Some libraries.
Okay, here we are.
Here I'm importing the Bert Large model and pushing it to the GPU.
And let's see.
Okay, so then I'm defining some convenience variables the number of MLP neurons and the number of layers
in the model.
Here is the data set yet again.
Seen this many times here.
Okay let's see I can just run all of that.
And here you see I'm preparing a vector of target indices as a torch tensor.
This is basically just allowing us to avoid having this for loop run redundantly inside the forward
pass in the hook function every time we need to call it.
So this code you have seen multiple times before, including in the previous video.
The only difference is that previously when I had this code to identify the location of the target words
in each sentence, I wasn't actually storing these data, these integers.
I was just immediately using them and then overwriting the variable on the next iteration.
And here I'm just putting them all into a vector so that I can use them multiple times.
Okay, so run that.
Here is the hook function.
This is really the main part of exercise.
One is writing this hook function.
You can see I'm implanting it into all of the layers, not just one layer into intermediate dense.
For reasons that I explained in the previous video.
we want to have the pre jlu activation values so that they are roughly normally distributed, which
makes them more amenable to doing t tests.
Okay.
So then uh yeah.
Grab all of the activations here.
Uh, so these are all the activations here are just the activations for the target indices.
So this uses the vector that I created up here.
And then once we have all of those data we can do a one sample t test.
Exactly like what I showed in the previous video testing against a difference value of zero.
And then here I'm using FDR correction.
As I discussed in the previous video, you can use FDR, you can use Bonferroni.
Doesn't really make much of a difference.
Also for reasons that I didn't discuss in the previous video, but I am going to discuss later on in
this video.
Okay.
And then I'm storing those results.
So this is a boolean vector here.
If the t test is significant and if the t value is positive then there's more activation in that neuron
for him target versus the her target in those sentences.
And same thing for here.
If it's negative then that's more for her.
And why is it positive and negative for him and her.
That's literally that's totally arbitrary.
That's just the way I set this up.
You could, uh, you know, you could run it like this and then like this, and then the results would
be exactly the same.
But now the signs would be flipped.
So we would need to flip these.
So it's good to be cautious about that and make sure you're doing everything consistently.
But otherwise the order of the numerator in the t test is pretty arbitrary.
Okay.
So I'll run that code.
And that completes exercise one.
The goal of exercise two is to run a forward pass of the Him.her dataset, so you can calculate all
of the t tests that you wrote in the previous exercise.
So after you run the forward pass, make sure you remove the hooks because we do not need it anymore
and we're going to use a different hook function in a later exercise.
You can check the keys of the dictionary and the sizes of one of the items.
This screenshot doesn't actually show all of the layers.
I just cut it off the screenshot over here.
But the point is that each layer in the model should have two associated keys, one for him and one
for her, and each one of those should contain a vector of 4096, corresponding to a Boolean vector
of trues and falses.
Whether each neuron in each layer shows a significant T value for him versus her pronoun tokens.
You can visualize the data by calculating the percentage of neurons in each layer that had a significant
T value.
So each layer will have two results.
And you can see that here.
So this result tells us that almost 50% of the neurons in layer zero had a significant T value for him,
greater than her.
And around 46 or whatever this number is, percent had a significant T value for her versus him.
And then you want to check whether there are any patterns here.
For example, if the these two values, the proportion of significant neurons generally goes down as
we get deeper into the model.
Maybe it shows a non-linear pattern or maybe no pattern at all.
So that's the goal for exercise two.
This is an important step in the entire code challenge, because now we know which neurons we want to
set to zero in the experiment later on.
Anyway, pause the video now and get to work and now I will switch to code.
Run the forward model and then remove all of the handles.
And yeah, this is just confirming the, uh, keys in the dictionary.
So we should have two for each layer.
And then the size of of one of these corresponds to the number of neurons in the expansion layer.
Okay.
And then to generate the plot so we can see whether there's any pattern in the statistical significances
over the course of the model.
All I'm doing here is summing up the vector.
So actually let me show you this to make sure that's clear.
So the vector itself is booleans.
Let's just set that to be uh actually yeah I'll just do it like this.
Uh, booleans is just a bunch of falses and trues.
And we can use a method called sum.
And that tells us that there are 1648 48 values of true in this vector.
And then if we want to know the proportion, we could divide by the number of neurons.
And then to convert that to percent I multiply by 100 okay.
So that is that.
And then uh because I'm running this in a for loop, I actually don't want to have a label in here.
If I have a label like this, then it's actually going to give me a label item, a legend item for every
individual data point.
But I don't want that.
I just want two points.
So yeah, I use this kind of hacky solution where basically actually I can show you what that does.
So I'm just kind of faking two data points all the way out here.
And those two data points actually have the labels that I want.
And then I'm just adjusting the y axis to ignore those from the visualization.
So they're way outside of the visualization range.
Okay.
so a couple of remarks to make about this plot.
First of all, it doesn't really seem like there's any really consistent patterns.
Maybe for the hidden neurons it goes down and then up.
Uh, and for the neurons, it doesn't really seem like there's anything consistent.
Of course, you could run some statistical tests to see if there are significant trends, but I'm not
going to worry about that here.
What I do want to point out is that we see a pretty large proportion.
So basically almost all of the neurons, you know, when you sum these two together, it's going to
be like well over, I don't know, 80%, uh, maybe even over 90% for all of the different layers show
a significant t value when using, uh, FDR correction.
Uh, if you use Bonferroni correction, these numbers will be smaller, but that's fine.
So the question is are we really going to zero out basically, you know, almost every single neuron
in the MLP layers.
The answer is no, we are not.
And the reason why we are not going to is that these data are shifted towards a negative distribution,
such that most of the pre jlu activation values that we are running the t test on have a negative value.
But when they are used in the model to calculate the adjustments to the embeddings vectors.
So at the end of the MLP sub block at the end of the transformer block, the Jlu non-linear activation
function gets applied and a lot of these negative values are zeroed out, or at least strongly reduced.
They're not necessarily set to zero.
That would be like the ReLU function.
But with the Gaussian function, then the negative values can pass through a little bit, but they're
strongly suppressed.
So that means that even though a lot of these neurons might get zeroed out by the manipulation that
we are going to do in the experiment in later on in this code challenge.
A lot of those neurons are going to have their values suppressed anyway.
So the actual number of neurons that we will really manipulate is relatively small.
Because we're only going to zero out the activations that are significant in the t test that we just
ran.
And also that have strong activation values above zero.
That is something that I want to make sure you are aware of.
It's not something I am explicitly calculating or quantifying in this code challenge, but of course
it's something you could quantify if you wanted to.
For example, you could count how many of these significant neurons also have average activation values
that are greater than zero.
So just a suggestion in case you are interested.
Exercise three is simple and straightforward.
You can literally copy the code from part two of the previous video into the code file for this video.
The model that we're using here is larger than in the previous video, but the sentences are the same
and the analysis is the same.
So what you certainly should do in this exercise is make sure that the visualization that you saw in
the previous video, that's what you see here in this screenshot.
Make sure that you can reproduce that figure in the new dataset with the larger model.
You can check to make sure that the pattern of results is the same as in the previous video.
But basically you just need this code here, because in the experiment, in the next exercise, we are
going to compare the results of manipulating the MLP neurons in each layer against what we observed
here.
I will now switch to code, but only briefly just to show you what I copied over and run the code to
create the variables.
So yeah, this code is the same.
This code is the same.
I believe every I think everything is literally exactly the same as in the previous video.
You can see the pattern of results is also exactly the same as what we observed in the previous video.
And now for exercise four, which is the main experiment here you see the for loop that you are going
to flesh out.
So loop over all of the layers in the model.
Create a function that you will implant into this layer and then remove immediately after the forward
pass.
And inside this hook function, you find the significant neurons from that layer from the t test that
you ran in exercise two and zero out only those neurons.
So this is going to be a targeted manipulation, so you only want to zero out the significant her neurons
for the her mass tokens in the her sentence.
And same thing for him.
After you do the forward pass then you get the results exactly as you did for exercise three and of
course also from the previous video.
So that's this code over here.
Now there are three sets of results that you want to gather from each layer.
And that's new for this exercise for this video.
The first is the total magnitude change.
That's just a measure of the overall impact of this ablation on the final output logits.
So to quantify this, this is the absolute value of all the changes.
And then take the average of the absolute values.
So for this analysis it does not matter if zeroing out these neurons had a negative or a positive impact.
We just want to know what is the overall change that was caused by this manipulation on the output logits.
And then we want the specific targeted results down here.
Now I'm not going to tell you exactly what data to pluck out, but it is the key analysis that I discussed
in the previous video.
Once you get these results for all of the layers, you can visualize them in two scatter plots.
Here on the left is the average of the absolute values of the change in logits with the manipulations.
So that's going to be one value per transform or block.
And here you see the first layer result.
And of course you want to see what it looks like at all the other layers.
And then here on the right plot is the two specific results that you calculated down here in this part
of the code.
So one result for the Him manipulation and one result for the her manipulation.
And of course, this exercise isn't just about creating the plot, but also interpreting it and thinking
about what it means.
So now is the time to pause the video and wrap up this code challenge.
And now I will switch to code.
The results matrix will be layers by three, and three corresponds to the three pieces of information.
So overall magnitude of the impact of this manipulation, the specific impact for her and the specific
impact for him.
Here I loop over layers and here I ablate or zero out just the neurons for the hearse.
The sentence with the word her masked out only for the token position where that mask is, and then
only the neurons from this specific layer that had a significant t test for her versus him.
And when we pass all of those conditions, then we set those neurons to zero.
And here is exactly the same.
But for the sentence with the Him token masked out for the location of the mask, and only for the neurons
that had a significant T value for him, and then those get zeroed out.
Okay.
And those go into yeah, that hook gets implanted into the intermediate layer.
And as you know from the previous video, it's also fine if you put it into the dense layer, it actually
does not matter, because the difference between dense and the output of intermediate is just whether
the activations pass through the jailer nonlinearity, which is applied to each neuron individually
regardless of its value.
Okay.
So here I run the forward pass.
Here I get the output logits bring them back to the CPU and transform them into numpy.
Remove the hook so I can implant a fresh hook on the next layer in the next iteration of this loop.
This code you have seen before in the previous video.
And yeah, here I am extracting the basically just the output logits for the two tokens.
Uh, then this is the difference between the clean version of the model and with no manipulation.
And uh, after the manipulations.
Okay.
And then now we get to the results.
So here I'm taking all of these delta logits.
And I'm literally just averaging them together after taking the absolute value.
Now I'm ignoring the first sentence here.
And why am I ignoring the first sentence?
Because I don't actually manipulate the first sentence.
So I already know.
We've discovered in the previous video, when we did a manipulation check that the first sentence was
all zeros, the difference values were all zeros.
Now, in theory, yeah, you could actually just set this up twice.
You could do something like this.
And then like, plus one plus one, that would also be fine.
Just basically completely ignore the first sentence in the code, but just I don't know.
In the interest of consistency, I decided to keep the data in for the first sentence and then just
ignore them here.
Okay, so that's just a global measure of the impact of this manipulation on the final output logits
for the him and her tokens, regardless of which sentence and which math position they're in.
Okay.
So then here is the specific modulations.
These correspond to the heights of the two bars that I made hypotheses about, as I discussed in the
previous video.
So let me scroll back up here.
So that is this pink bar over here.
It's the logit for the her token or her vocab item in the her mass token position in the her mask sentence.
And then this blue bar over here for the him logits for the him token position in the him mask sentence.
So this pink bar and the impact of the manipulation on this bar and the impact of the manipulation on
this bar.
That also means that I am ignoring all of these in the results that I store down here.
That does mean that I'm losing some richness.
There could be some interesting manipulations that are having an interesting impact.
And just in the interest of simplicity, I am just focusing on these key results over here.
Okay.
And then here I'm generating that plot.
So the overall impact, uh, I'm not sure if it if there's a real pattern here that it goes up and down
and back up again.
As you know, there's always some interesting unique dynamics happening at the very final transformer
block, even without Explicitly incorporating the final layer norm, which is what the hugging face
Hidden States does for this last transformer block.
So that's actually not included here.
This is just the MLP layer.
There's no layer norm associated with this.
Anyway.
Uh yeah.
And then here you see these specific manipulations.
Uh, what I would expect to see is positive values here.
Remember positive values in this delta.
The way that I set up the subtraction would indicate that the, uh, that zeroing out these MLP neurons
has a negative impact.
So it decreases the logit for the correct token.
And that certainly is the case at some layers, but it's also certainly not the case at other layers.
And how much this is, uh, really something special about what's happening at layer 18.
I'm not sure.
Uh, this is the sort of thing that you would have to repeat this Exercise over lots of different sentences
to gather more data, to know whether there's just something, you know, the model's doing something
quirky over here, or whether this is really something unique and special happening here that would
be reproducible over a larger data set.
You know, one of the things that makes interpretability research on challenging is that there are a
lot of details and nuances to keep in mind.
For example, in the previous video, I explained why I was hooking into the pre activations for running
the t test, but then zeroing out the post activations.
That's the kind of nuance that makes sense when you come across it, but it's not necessarily the sort
of thing you would think about when you are first learning about LL, and that's why it's good to have
solid hypotheses and a good experiment.
And of course, you know, by this time in the course.
And if you've taken any other courses from me, I am a huge fan of data visualization, and I think
that visualizing data, especially histograms and scatterplots, can really go a long way to helping
you understand the characteristics of a complex system, like a language model, and whether you are
analyzing and manipulating the right parts of a model.
Okay.
All of that said, there's no guarantee of getting really interesting results just because you have
an interesting experiment.
That's just part of the business of science.
On the other hand, you do need to have a sufficient amount of data and statistical power to interpret
null results.
And that certainly wasn't the case here with only one sentence to test the manipulation.
Anyway, that's it for this inferential statistical approach to identifying subsets of neurons to manipulate.